Developer
experience

Takeaways
Software doesn’t build itself. Even
when assisted by AI, people build
software, and their experiences at
work are a foundational component
of successful organizations.

Ultimately, software is built for people,
so it’s the organization’s responsibility to
foster environments that help developers
focus on building software that will
improve the user experience. We also
find that stable environments, where
priorities are not constantly shifting,
lead to small but meaningful increases in
productivity and important, meaningful
decreases in employee burnout.

In this year’s report, we again found
that alignment between what developers
build and what users need allows
employees and organizations to thrive.
Developers are more productive,
less prone to experiencing burnout,
and more likely to build high quality
products when they build software
with a user-centered mindset.

Environmental factors have substantial
consequences in the quality of the
products developed, and the overall
experience of developers whose job
is to build those products.
57

v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Put the user first, and (almost)
everything else falls into place

This year, we asked questions focused
on understanding whether developers:

We think that the job of a developer
is pretty cool. Developers are at the
forefront of technological advancements
and help shape how we live, work, and
interact with the world.

1. Incorporate user feedback to revisit
and reprioritize features

Their jobs are fundamentally tied to
people–the users of the software and
applications they create. Yet developers
often work in environments that prioritize
features and innovation. There’s less
emphasis on figuring out whether these
features provide value to the people who
use the products they make.

3. Believe focusing on the user is key to
the success of the business

2. Know what users want to accomplish
with a specific application/service

4. Believe the user experience is a top
business priority

Here we provide compelling evidence
showing that an approach to software
development that prioritizes the end
user positively impacts employees and
organizations alike.

58
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Our findings and what they mean

However, our data indicates there’s
another path that leads to success:

Our data strongly suggests that
organizations that see users’ needs
and challenges as a guiding light
make better products.

Developers and their employers,
and organizations in general, can
create a user-centered approach to
software development.

We find that focusing on the user
increases productivity and job
satisfaction, while reducing the
risk of burnout.

We find that when organizations know
and understand users’ needs, stability
and throughput of software delivery are
not a requirement for product quality.
Product quality will be high as long as the
user experience is at the forefront.

Importantly, these benefits extend
beyond the individual employee to
the organization. In previous years,
we’ve highlighted that high performing
organizations deliver software quickly
and reliably. The implication is that
software-delivery performance is a
requirement for success.

When organizations don’t focus on
the user, don’t incorporate user
feedback into their development
process, doubling down on stable
and fast delivery is the only path to
product quality (see Figure 15).

59
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

We understand the inclination that
some organizations might have to focus
on creating features and innovating
on technologies. At face value, this
approach makes sense. After all,
developers most certainly know the ins
and outs of the technology much better
than their average user.

When organizations and employees
understand how their users experience
the world, they increase the likelihood
of building features that address the real
needs of their users. Addressing real user
needs increases the chances of those
features being actually used.
Focus on building for your user and
you will create delightful products.

However, developing software based on
assumptions about the user experience
increases the likelihood of developers
building features that are perhaps shiny
but hardly used.1

Predicted product performance

Level of user centricity

Low

Medium

High

9

8

7

6

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

Delivery throughput

Figure 15: Product performance and delivery throughput across 3 levels of user centricity

60
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Why is a user-centered approach
to software development such a
powerful philosophy and practice?

Provides a clear sense of direction:
A user-centered approach to software
development can fundamentally alter
how developers view their work. Instead
of shipping arbitrary features and
guessing whether users might use them,
developers can rely on user feedback to
help them prioritize what to build.

Academic research shows that deriving
a sense of purpose from work benefits
employees and organizations.2,3
For example, a recent survey showed
that 93% of workers reported that it’s
important to have a job where they feel
the work they do is meaningful.4 In a
similar vein, another survey found that
on average, respondents were willing
to relinquish 23% of their entire future
earnings if it meant they could have a
job that was always meaningful.5

This approach gives developers
confidence that the features they are
working on have a reason for being.
Suddenly, their work has meaning: to
ensure people have a superb experience
when using their products and services.
There’s no longer a disconnect between
the software that’s developed and the
world in which it lives.

That’s an eye-popping trade-off
employees are willing to make. It tells us
something about what motivates people,
and that people want to spend their time
doing something that matters.

Developers can see the direct
impact of their work through the
software they create.

“It would be grand if everybody
could work at a company that
affects individuals outside of
the company, or [in] your local
community in a positive way. That’s
not always the case. That’s not
always possible. A lot of the grand
vision of autonomous driving is
that it is going to enable people
that can drive [to] sleep while
they’re on a motorway. That’s not
why I’m here. I want to help people
that can’t drive to be able to get
about, wherever they want, have
the freedom to do whatever they
want to do.” (P2)6

“We are, as a company, under
pressure to deliver. So, all of
these, like, nice shiny things, or
discussion points about how you
want to improve, it’s kind of, like,
with the recent change in how
we’re structured, we’re focusing
on delivery, not quality, and for
me, personally, that’s kind of a big
bugbear.” (P9)

61
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Increases cross-functional
collaborations:

This approach to software development
can help developers break out of silos,
seek alignment, foster teamwork, and
create opportunities to learn more from
others. Problem solving takes a different
shape. It’s not just about how to solve
technical problems, but how to do so in
ways that serve the user best.

Even the most talented developer
doesn’t build software on their own.
Building high-quality products takes the
collaboration of many people often with
different yet complementary talents.
A user-centered approach to
development allows developers
to engage in cross-functional
collaborations across the organization.
In doing so, their responsibilities
extend beyond simply shipping
software. They are now part of a team
driven to create incredible experiences
for the people who use them.

This approach can help increase
employee engagement and create an
even more intellectually-stimulating
environment that can stave off
the feelings of stagnation that are
associated with burnout.

What can organizations do?
Based on our findings, we recommend
organizations invest time and resources
in getting to know their users. Focus on
understanding who you are building for,
and the challenges they experience.
We strongly believe this is a worthy
investment.

Resist the temptation to make
assumptions about your users. Observe
them in their environments, ask them
questions, and be humble enough
to pivot based on what they tell you.
In doing so, developers will be more
productive and be less prone to burnout
while delivering higher quality products.

62
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

The combination of good docs and a
user-centered approach to software
development is a powerful one.

We see that internal documentation
doesn’t meaningfully affect predicted
product performance without user
signals. However, if a team has a high
quality internal documentation then user
signals included in it will have a higher
impact on product performance.

Teams that focus on the user see an
increase in product performance. When
this focus on the user is combined
with an environment of quality internal
documentation, this increase in product
performance is amplified (see Figure 16).
This finding is similar to the behavior that
we see where documentation amplifies
a technical capability’s impact on
organizational performance.7

We started to look at documentation
in 2021, and every year we continue
to find extensive impact of quality
documentation. This year’s findings
adds internal documentation’s impact
on predicted product performance
to the list.

Documentation helps propagate user
signals and feedback across the team
and into the product itself.

Predicted product performance

Level of user centricity

Low

Medium

High

9

8

7

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

Documentation quality
The graph is a composite of 12000 lines from simulations trying to estimate the most plausible pattern
Figure 16: Product performance and documentation quality across 3 levels of user centricity

63
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Culture of documentation

In these cases, our measure of quality
documentation would likely score low.
This type of content is written for the
wrong audience so doesn’t perform as
well when you try to use it while doing
your work. And too much documentation
can be as problematic as not enough.

The Agile manifesto advocates for
“working software over comprehensive
documentation”.7 We continue to find,
however, that quality documentation is a
key component of working software.
“Comprehensive documentation”
may be a phrase standing in for
unhealthy practices, which might
include documentation. Problematic
documentation includes documentation
that is created only for bureaucratic
purposes, or to paper over mistrust
between management and employees.
An unhealthy documentation culture
can also include writing documentation,
but not maintaining or consolidating
the documentation.

Our measure of quality documentation
includes attributes like findability
and reliability of the documentation.
Remember, for internal documentation,
the primary audience is your colleagues
or even your future self trying to
accomplish specific tasks.8 Teams
with a healthy documentation culture
have a focus on serving these readers.
This is another way that focusing on
your users matters.

You can create a healthy culture of documentation on your own teams by
following the practices we’ve identified to create quality documentation,
such as:

Documenting critical use cases.

Maintaining documentation as part of
the software development lifecycle.

Taking training in technical writing.
Deleting out-of-date or redundant
documentation.

Defining ownership and processes
to update the documentation.

Recognizing documentation work in
performance reviews and promotions.

Distributing documentation work
within the team.

64
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

The perils of
ever-shifting priorities

Our findings and what they mean

We all know the feeling. You’ve spent
the last few months working on a new
feature. You know it’s the right thing to
build for your users, you are focused and
motivated. Suddenly, or seemingly so, the
leadership team decides to change the
organization’s priorities. Now it’s unclear
whether your project will be paused,
scrapped, Frankensteined, or mutated.

Overall, our findings show small
but meaningful decreases in
productivity and substantial increases
in burnout when organizations have
unstable priorities.
Our data indicates it is challenging
to mitigate this increase in burnout.
We examined whether having strong
leaders, good internal documents, and
a user-centered approach to software
development can help counteract the
effect of shifting priorities on burnout.

This common experience can have
profound implications for employees and
organizations. Here we examine what
happens when organizations constantly
shift their priorities.

The answer is: They can’t. An organization
can have all these positive traits and, if
priorities are unstable, employees will still
be at risk of experiencing burnout.

65
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Why are unstable
organizational priorities bad
for employees’ well-being?

What happens when
priorities stabilize?
Our findings here are a little puzzling.
We find that when priorities are
stabilized, software delivery performance
declines. It becomes slow and less stable
in its delivery.

We hypothesize that unstable
organizational priorities increase
employee burnout by creating unclear
expectations, decreasing employees'
sense of control, and increasing the
size of their workloads.

We hypothesize that this might be
because organizations with stable
priorities might have products and
services that are generally in good shape
so changes are made less frequently. It
is also possible that stability of priorities
leads to shipping less and in larger
batches than recommended.

To be clear, we believe that the
problem is not with changing priorities
themselves. Business goals and product
direction shift all the time. It can be
good for organizational priorities to
be malleable.
We believe it is the frequency with which
priorities change that has a negative
impact on employees' well-being.
The uncertainty that accompanies
unstable priorities implies something
chronic about the frequency with which
priorities change.

Nevertheless, we find this to be an
unexpected finding. Why do you think
stabilizing organizational priorities
decreases the speed and stability
of software delivery?

Decades of academic research
have shown the detrimental effects of
chronic stress on health and well-being.9
We see parallels between research on
chronic stress and our findings.
Chronic instability increases uncertainty
and decreases perceived control.
This combination is an excellent recipe
for burnout.

66
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Building AI for end users creates
stability in priorities, but not stability
in delivery.

This period likely leads to a
destabilization of priorities as leaders
try to figure the best move for the
organization. As the dust settles, and
organizations clarify their next steps,
priorities begin to stabilize.

Incorporating AI-powered experiences
for end users stabilizes organizational
priorities. This sounds like a flashy
endorsement for AI. However, we do
not interpret this finding as telling us
something meaningful about AI itself.

Priorities stabilizing, however, doesn’t
immediately translate into the software
delivery process stabilizing. Our analyses
show that a shift to adding AI-powered
experiences into your service or
application comes with challenges and
growing pains.

Instead, we believe that shifting efforts
towards building AI provides clarity and
a northstar for organizations to follow.
This clarity, and not AI, is what leads to a
stabilization of organizational priorities.

We find that teams that have shifted have
a significant 10% decrease in software
delivery stability relative to teams who
have not. Here is a visualization depicting
the challenge.

This is worth highlighting because it tells
us something about what happens to
organizations when new technologies
emerge. New technologies bring change
and organizations need time to adapt.

Predicted delivery stability

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

Strongly disagree

Mostly disagree

Slightly disagree Neither agree nor disagree Slightly agree

Mostly agree

Strongly agree

Adding AI-powered experiences to service or application

*Each line is one of 4000 simulations trying to estimate the most plausible pattern
Figure 17: Software delivery stability as a function of adding AI-powered experiences
to service or application

67
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

What can organizations do?
The answer, while easy, might not be
so simple. Based on our findings, we
recommend organizations focus on
stabilizing their priorities. This is one sure
way to counteract the negative effects of
unstable priorities on employee burnout.
Our findings show the negative effects
of unstable priorities are resistant
to having good leaders, good
documentation, and a user-centered
approach to software development.
This leads us to believe that, aside from
creating stability, there’s not much
organizations can do to avoid burnout
aside from finding ways to (1) stabilize
priorities and (2) shield employees from
having their day-to-day be impacted by
the constant shift in priorities.

1.

https://www.nngroup.com/articles/bridging-the-designer-user-gap/
https://executiveeducation.wharton.upenn.edu/thought-leadership/wharton-at-work/2024/03/creating-meaning-at-work/
3. https://www.apa.org/pubs/reports/work-in-america/2023-workplace-health-well-being
4. https://bigthink.com/the-present/harvard-business-review-americans-meaningful-work/
5. https://hbr.org/2018/11/9-out-of-10-people-are-willing-to-earn-less-money-to-do-more-meaningful-work
6. (P[N]), for example (P1), indicates pseudonym of interview participants.
7. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/devops-sre/deep-dive-into-2022-state-of-devops-report-on-documentation and
Accelerate State of DevOps Report 2023 - https://dora.dev/research/2023/dora-report
8. https://agilemanifesto.org/
9. Other audiences exist, such as management, regulators, or auditors.
10. Cohen S, Janicki-Deverts D, Miller GE. Psychological Stress and Disease. JAMA. 2007;298(14):1685–1687.doi:10.1001/
jama.298.14.1685
2.

68
v. 2024.3

Developer experience

Leading
transformations

A lot needs to be in place for
transformation to work. This year,
we’ve found high-performing teams
are ones that prioritize stability, focus
on their users, have good leaders,
and craft quality documentation. Our
research points to some useful paths
in helping you plot a course towards
successful transformation.
We have found the key to success is
to approach transformation from a
mindset of continuous improvement.
High performers in our study understand
the variables holding them back, and
methodically and continuously improve
using the DORA metrics as a baseline.
While long-term success requires
excellence in all pillars, a decade of DORA
research has pointed us to four specific,
impactful ways to get started on driving
transformation in your own organization.
69
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Transformational
leadership
Transformational leadership is a
model in which leaders inspire and
motivate employees to achieve higher
performance by appealing to their
values and sense of purpose, facilitating
wide-scale organizational change.
These leaders encourage their teams
to work towards a common goal through
the following dimensions:1

Vision

They have a clear vision of where their team and the
organization are going.

Inspirational
communication

They say positive things about the team; make employees proud
to be a part of their organization; encourage people to see
changing conditions as situations full of opportunities.

Intellectual
stimulation

They challenge team members to think about old problems
in new ways and to rethink some of their basic assumptions
about their work.

Supportive
leadership

They consider others’ personal feelings before acting; behave in
a manner which is thoughtful of others’ personal needs.

Personal
recognition

They commend team members when they do a better-thanaverage job; acknowledge improvement in quality of team
members' work.

70
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

This year, we saw that transformational
leadership leads to a boost in
employee productivity. We see that
increasing transformational leadership
by 25% leads to a 9% increase in
employee productivity.

Our research found a statistically
significant relationship between the
above qualities of leadership and IT
performance in 2017. High-performing
teams had leaders with strong scores
across all five characteristics and lowperforming teams had the lowest scores.
Additionally, we saw that there’s a strong
correlation between transformative
leadership and Employee Net Promoter
Score (eNPS), the likelihood to
recommend working at a company.

Transformational leadership can help
improve more than just productivity.
Having good leaders can also lead to:
• A decrease in employee burnout

That said, transformative leadership by
itself does not lead to high performance,
but should be seen as an enabler.

• An increase in job satisfaction
• An increase in team performance

Transformative leadership plays a key
role in enabling the adoption of technical
and product-management capabilities
and practices. This is enabled by (1)
delegating authority and autonomy to
teams; (2) providing them the metrics
and business intelligence needed to solve
problems; and (3) creating incentive
structures around value delivery as
opposed to feature delivery.

• An improved product performance
• An improved organizational
performance

Transformation takes time and requires
tools. Resources must be allocated by
leadership specifically for the task of
improvement. Good leaders play a key
role in providing teams with the time and
funding necessary to improve. Engineers
should not be expected to learn new
things and automate on their off time,
this should be baked into their schedule.

71
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Our research has helped to flip the
narrative of IT being a cost-center
to IT being an investment that drives
business success. In 2020, we wrote
the ROI of DevOps whitepaper,2 which
contains calculations you can use to
help articulate potential value created by
investing in IT improvement.

teams to achieve win-win outcomes;
lower levels of burnout; more effective
leadership; and effective implementation
of both continuous delivery and
lean management practices.”3 We
recommend dedicating a certain amount
of capacity specifically for improvement.

Monetary return is only one of the
returns you can expect from this
investment. Our research in 2015
showed that, “organizational investment
in DevOps is strongly correlated with
organizational culture; the ability of
development, operations, and infosec

If transformational leadership increases by 25%...

Job satisfaction
Burnout

9.1%

-9.9%

Outcome

Productivity

8.7%

Team performance

8.7%

Product performance

4.5%

Organization performance

10.3%

-10

0

-5

5

10

Estimated % change in outcome
Point = estimated value
Error bar = 89% uncertainty interval
Figure 18: Impacts of transformational leadership on various outcomes.

72
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Be relentlessly user-centric
This year's research shows that
organizations with strong leaders
and a focus on building software that
addresses user needs leads to the
development of better products: It’s a
powerful combination. When the user is
at the center of software development,
leaders have a clear vision to articulate.

Not only do products improve,
but employees are more satisfied
with their jobs and less likely to
experience burnout.
Fast, stable software delivery
enables organizations more frequent
opportunities to experiment and learn.
Ideally, these experiments and iterations
are based on user feedback. Fast and
stable software delivery allows you to
experiment, better understand user
needs, and quickly respond if those
needs are not being met.

The ultimate goal is for users to love the
products we create. As we discuss in the
Developer experience chapter, focusing
on the user gives product capabilities
a reason to exist. Developers can
confidently build these features knowing
they’ll help improve the user experience.

Having speed and stability baked
into your delivery also allows you
to more easily adjust to market
changes or competition.

We see that teams that have a deep
desire to understand and align to their
users’ needs and the mechanisms to
collect, track, and respond to user
feedback have the highest levels of
organizational performance. In fact,
organizations can be successful even
without high levels of software velocity
and stability, as long as they are userfocused. In 2023 we saw user-centered
teams have a 40% higher level of
organizational performance compared to
those that did not,4 and in 2016 we also
saw that user-centered teams had better
organizational performance.

It is important to remember that
your internal developers are also users.
Internal Developer Platforms (IDPs) are a
way your organization can deliver value
to developers that in turn deliver value to
external users or other internal users.
Our research shows that successful
IDPs are developed as a product and
focus on user centricity to deliver an
experience that allows developers to
work independently. An IDP deployed
in this way leads to higher individual
productivity, higher team productivity,
and higher organizational performance.

This year’s research echoes previous
findings. Teams that focus on the user
make better products.

73
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Become a data-informed organization
The ability to visualize your progress
toward success is critical. Over the last
10 years we have made the case for
becoming a data-informed organization.
DORA's four key metrics5 have become
a global standard for measuring
software delivery performance, but
this is only part of the story. We have
identified more than 30 capabilities and
processes6 that can be used to drive
organizational improvement.

speed and stability. As a result, the
benefits gained by speed and stability
are diminished as higher performance
becomes ubiquitous.
Thinking about transformation
holistically, we recommend creating
dashboards and visualizations that
combine both technical metrics
(such as our four keys and reliability
metrics) and business metrics. This helps
bridge the gap between the top-down
and bottom-up transformation efforts.
This also helps connect your northstar,
OKRs, and employee goals with the
investments made in IT. They can help
quantify the ROI.

The value in the metrics lies in their
ability to tell you if you are improving. The
four key metrics should be used at the
application and service levels, and not at
the organization or line-of-business level.
The metrics should be used to visualize
your efforts in continuous improvement
and not to compare teams — and
certainly not to compare individuals.

We believe metrics are a requirement
for excellence. Metrics facilitate decision
making. The more metrics you collect,
quantitative and qualitative, the better
and more informed decisions you can
make. People will always have opinions
on the value of the data or the meaning
of the data, but using data as the
basis by which to make a decision
is often preferable to relying on opinion
or intuition.

The metrics should also not be used as
a maturity model for your application
or service teams. Being a low, medium,
high, or elite performer is interesting,
but we urge caution as these monikers
have little value in the context of your
transformation journey.
As our research progresses and evolves,
we encourage you to think beyond the
four keys. It has become clear that user
feedback metrics are as important as
the four key metrics. We believe this
is because most teams have devised
workable solutions for improving
74
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Be all-in on cloud or stay in the data center
We have been investigating the
relationship between the NIST defined-5
characteristics of cloud computing7
(on-demand self-service, broad network
access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity,
and measured service also known as
flexible infrastructure) and organizational
performance since 2018. We see that
successful teams are more likely to take
advantage of flexible infrastructure than
less successful teams.

Organizations may be better off staying
in the data center if they are not willing
to radically transform their application
or service. Of course, to accomplish
this, it is not simply adopting tools
or technologies, but often an entire
new paradigm in designing, building,
deploying, and running applications.
Making large-scale changes is easier
when starting with a small number of
services, we recommend an iterative
approach that helps teams and
organizations to learn and improve as
they move forward.

Last year, our research led us to the most
striking bit of information on this topic
to date: Using the cloud without taking
advantage of the five characteristics
can be detrimental and predicts
decreased organizational performance.
75
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

Summary
What we’ve seen consistently over the
last 10 years is that transformation is a
requirement for success. What many
organizations misunderstand is that
transformation isn’t a destination, but
a journey of continuous improvement.8
Our research is clear: Companies that are
not continuously improving are actually
falling behind. Conversely, companies
that adopt a mindset of continuous
improvement see the highest levels
of success.

The idea of a never-ending journey can
seem daunting. It’s easy to get stuck
in planning or designing the perfect
transformation. The key to success is
rolling up your sleeves and just getting
to work. The goal of the organization and
your teams should be to simply be a little
better than you were yesterday. The goal
of our last 10 years of research and into
the future is to help you get better at
getting better.

On this journey, be aware that you
will likely hit a little bit of pain and
discomfort along the way. Our research
has shown an initial drop in performance
followed by big gains (also known as
the “ j-curve “) with DevOps,9 SRE,10 and
this year with Platform Engineering. This
is normal, and if you are continuously
improving, things will get better and you
will come out the other end in much
better shape than when you started.

1.

Dimensions of transformational leadership: Conceptual and empirical extensions - Rafferty, A. E., & Griffin, M. A.
The ROI of DevOps Transformation - https://dora.dev/research/2020/
3. 2015 State of DevOps Report https://dora.dev/research/2015/2015-state-of-devops-report.pdf#page=25
4. 2023 Accelerate State of DevOps Report https://dora.dev/research/2023/dora-report/2023-dora-accelerate-state-of-devops-report.pdf#page=17
5. DORA's Four Key Metrics https://dora.dev/guides/dora-metrics-four-keys/
6. DORA's capabilities and processess https://dora.dev/capabilities/
7. NIST defined-5 characteristics of cloud computing https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf
8. Journey of continuous improvement
https://cloud.google.com/transform/moving-shields-into-position-organizing-security-for-digital-transformation
9. 2018 Accelerate State of DevOps Report https://dora.dev/research/2018/dora-report/
10. 2022 State of DevOps Report https://dora.dev/research/2022/dora-report/
2.

76
v. 2024.3

Leading transformations

